KEP-4639: update to most recent implementation state and graduate to beta (#4897)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/4639-oci-volume-source/README.md

- This proposal does not aim to replace existing `VolumeSource` types.
- This proposal does not address other use cases for OCI objects beyond directory sharing among containers in a pod.
- Mounting thousands of images in a single pod.
- The enhancement leaves single file use case out for now and restrict the mount
  output to directories.
- The runtimes (CRI-O, containerd, others) will have to agree on the

>   implementation of how images are manifested as directories. We don't want

Reviewer: This bullet was tied to the issue of what is an artifact how is it manifested as directories on a per artifact type basis.. the layering of images by contrast are well known. So this bullet does not make sense when changing it to image.

Reviewer 2: Added a note that it's out of scope.

8. **Security and Performance Optimization**:
   - Implement thorough security checks to mitigate risks such as path traversal attacks.

>    - Optimize performance for handling large OCI images, including caching strategies and efficient retrieval methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Optimize performance for handling large OCI image volume sources, including caching strategies and efficient retrieval methods.
```

For security reasons, volume mounts should set the [`noexec`] and `ro`
(read-only) options by default.

> Note: in the process of mounting images into the container's rootfs, there may need to be intermediate mounts created. This is especially relevant if

Reviewer 3: How does this feature play with a separate container runtime filesystem?

Let's say we have 
nodefs (ephemeral-storage + kubelet fs)
imagefs (container runtime filesystem)

It isn't clear to me if this will be mounted on container runtime filesystem or on the kubelet filesystem.

Reviewer 2: This is up to the runtime implementation, the kubelet will not manage the actual path on disk.

extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

- `pkg/kubelet/images`: `2-10-2024` - `83.8`
- `pkg/kubelet/kuberuntime`: `2-10-2024` - `66.6`

##### Integration tests

Integration tests for the kubelet are not existing yet and will be covered by

> extending the e2e_node, e2e and unit tests.

Reviewer: critest maybe?

Author: that'd test the CRI, which i'd say is out of scope for this

Reviewer: Are you scoping the tests to a mock CRI?

Reviewer: not following the this isn't CRI when the CRI server is the volume manager for the OCI image volumes.. or maybe I've missed something?

We expect no non-infra related flakes in the last month as a GA graduation criteria.
-->

- [sig-node] ImageVolume [NodeFeature:ImageVolume] should fail if image volume is not existing
- [sig-node] ImageVolume [NodeFeature:ImageVolume] should succeed if image volume is not existing but unused
- [sig-node] ImageVolume [NodeFeature:ImageVolume] should succeed with multiple pods and same image on the same node
- [sig-node] ImageVolume [NodeFeature:ImageVolume] should succeed with pod and multiple volumes
- [sig-node] ImageVolume [NodeFeature:ImageVolume] should succeed with pod and pull policy of Always

> https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-node-cri-o#pr-crio-cgrpv2-imagevolume-e2e

Reviewer 3: Can we make it clear here that we will add containerd tests once containerd has support for this feature?

Reviewer 2: Yep, done :+1:

-->

- <test>: <link to test coverage>

> SIG node does not typically write e2e tests

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
SIG node does not typically write integration tests
```

TBH I would probably expand on this. We don't write integration tests because we kubelet is covered by the e2e_node suite. We as a sig would love to write more integration tests but we are limiting in what we can do.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Integration tests for the kubelet are not existing yet and will be covered by extending the available e2e test suites.
```

Reviewer 4: Sascha's look more correct, this is not about what one SIG does, is just because this feature does not require them or are covered with e2e ... if SIG node has to write any API object related feature must probably it must require integration tests.

Reviewer 5: > We as a sig would love to write more integration tests but we are limiting in what we can do.

Careful here: if lack of resources is the reason for not writing integration tests when they would be desirable for a feature, then development of that feature needs to slow down. Please don't skip testing to deliver features faster.

Reviewer 6: sig-node's difficulty with e2e tests has historically been that e2e tests don't give control of the kubelet flags.  this feature appears to be functional without changing kubelet flags, so why can't we write an e2e test for this?

- <test>: <link to test coverage>

> No tests exist yet, but a combination of e2e and e2e_node tests will be added for beta:

Reviewer 3: I don't think this is true. @saschagrunert added a presubmit to test this feature in alpha.

Reviewer 3: https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-node-cri-o#pr-crio-cgrpv2-imagevolume-e2e

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/test/e2e_node/image_volume.go

Reviewer 2: I would also assume that the existing tests are sufficient for now. If we decide to expand the feature, then an e2e test update would be expected as well.

Reviewer 4: e2e are mandatory for betas IIRC

- Deprecate the flag
-->

#### Alpha

- Initial implementation added
- CRI implementations starting to add support

> #### Beta

Reviewer 7: I really want this KEP to progress faster as it will help us have a good point of discussions with the model producers. However I have trouble rationalizing how we can change APIs and have Containerd support not merged and declare the feature as beta. Even if it is OFF by default.

I think we have to go to beta in 1.33 with way more confidence and keep it as a alpha in 1.32.

/hold

Reviewer 8: +1

cc/ @samuelkarp @mikebrow

Author: I hear you about the API change, I still disagree on CRI support. I don't think we need to hash this out now, and we don't need to push to beta here, but I would like to come to consensus as a SIG on what the policy is going forward. It was my understanding our consensus said we'd move forward here and I'd like to avoid this confusion in the future

Reviewer: We held a containerd community meeting today and 1) the general consensus/agreement was that we will definitely have our 2.0 GA release before kubecon; 2) we have consensus for heading back to roughly twice a year minor release cycles after 2.0; 3) the prior version of this feature is fairly close to merge in our main branch feeding our 2.0 release candidates .. we are still considering the best logic for the gc life cycle of the pod scoped host image volume created by the runtime from the image. 

A) I think the proposal here for beta criteria was that it would be merged into containerd main and made available as a release candidate before the beta designation would be merged into kubelet, and the feature gate would remain default off if we don't GA it in time, but could be promoted to default on if GA'd in 2.0 and there is consensus by sig-node owners. 
B) We still need the other changes in this KEP update.

Reviewer 7: Those are great news!

We still need to iterate on API and make sure containerd has the implementation merged. Not promoting to beta is a statement of confidence from k8s standpoint.

Reviewer 4: I commented on the thread in the SIG architecture mailing list [https://groups.google.com/d/msgid/kubernetes-sig-architecture/99da48f1-b9f5-47d8-8730-a17e87acd11bn%40googlegroups.com](https://groups.google.com/d/msgid/kubernetes-sig-architecture/99da48f1-b9f5-47d8-8730-a17e87acd11bn%40googlegroups.com?utm_medium=email&utm_source=footer)  and raising my concern here for visibility too

This feature adds a new field to an stable object, like the Pod, and that has a lot of implications and consequences,
The user facing problem is also , anecdotally, evident as you can see here https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kind/issues/3745

- Add support for [`subPath`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/#using-subpath):
    - By adding a new CRI string `image_sub_path` field to the
      [`Mount`](https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/010fdf8/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L221)
      message. Alternatively it would be possible to re-use the existing
      [`Mount.host_path`] field which is empty right now if an image volume is
      being used.

>     - If the sub path does not exist in the image, then runtimes are considered

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
    - If the sub path does not exist in the image, then runtimes should fail and ..
```

Reviewer 2: :+1:

      to fail and return an error.
- Expand unit and e2e tests.
- Add three kubelet metrics for an admin to see the success of their image volumes:
    - `image_volume_requested_total`
    - `image_volume_mounted_success`
    - `image_volume_mounted_error`
- Production support in at least one of CRI-O and containerd, and a release
  candidate is available in the other.

>     - However, until both CRI-O and containerd have a released RC with support, this feature will be off by default

Reviewer 10: It's odd to specify which specific third party projects must support this in order for an enhancement to graduate.

Author: these are new conventions being put together by SIG node to signal feature stability while also giving time for third-party projects to adopt them

- Deprecate the flag
-->

#### Alpha

- Initial implementation added

> - CRI implementations add support

Reviewer: note this is plural and has not been met..

Reviewer 2: Rephrased that to "starting to add support"

#### Beta

> 

Reviewer 2: Added that.

- Add support for [`subPath`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/#using-subpath):
    - By adding a new CRI string `image_sub_path` field to the

>       [`Mount`](https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/010fdf8/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L221)

Reviewer: prefer using an additional image ref only field vs overloading host path for a new purpose

- Deprecate the flag
-->

#### Alpha

- Initial implementation added
- CRI implementations starting to add support

#### Beta

- Add support for [`subPath`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/#using-subpath):
    - By adding a new CRI string `image_sub_path` field to the

>       [`Mount`](https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/010fdf8/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L221)

Reviewer: sgtm

      message. Alternatively it would be possible to re-use the existing
      [`Mount.host_path`] field which is empty right now if an image volume is

>       being used.

Reviewer: prefer new field

    - If the sub path does not exist in the image, then runtimes should fail and
      return an error.
- Expand unit and e2e tests.
- Add three kubelet metrics for an admin to see the success of their image volumes:
    - `image_volume_requested_total`
    - `image_volume_mounted_success`
    - `image_volume_mounted_error`
- Production support in at least one of CRI-O and containerd, and a release
  candidate is available in the other.

>     - However, until both CRI-O and containerd have a released RC with support, this feature will be off by default

Reviewer: sgtm

- Deprecate the flag
-->

#### Alpha

- Initial implementation added
- CRI implementations add support

#### Beta

> - Add support for subpath volumes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Add support for [`subPath`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/#using-subpath)
```

- Deprecate the flag
-->

#### Alpha

- Initial implementation added
- CRI implementations add support

#### Beta

> - Add support for [`subPath`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/#using-subpath)

Reviewer 11: For other volume types, the subpath for a container mount is maintained by the kubelet. kubelet generate the computed hostPath if a subpath is provided and pass it into CRI, so the CRI doesn't know the subpath. But the image volume is different. If we want to support subpath for image volume, we need to pass the subpath to CRI runtime.  Then the CRI runtime should handle the subpath for image volume. 

BTW, the validation on pod spec disallows the subpath for image volume now. We need to remove this limitation and add more detailed design for subpath support for image volume in this KEP.

Reviewer 2: How about reusing the `hostPath` variable of the mount for the sub path?
https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/010fdf8d785a7f35fa5a1cc80c40bde0c13e1dfd/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L224-L227

It's empty if `image != nil` per: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/0b91def6bcbdde82206ec779791762fb6bc337af/pkg/kubelet/kubelet_pods.go#L267-L274

Reviewer 11: ```
// Mount specifies a host volume to mount into a container.
message Mount {
    // Path of the mount within the container.
    string container_path = 1;
    // Path of the mount on the host. If the hostPath doesn't exist, then runtimes
    // should report error. If the hostpath is a symbolic link, runtimes should
    // follow the symlink and mount the real destination to container.
    string host_path = 2;
```

According to cri spec, we can not reuse the host_path for image volume type. kubelet doesn't know the actual path which is determined by the runtime.

Reviewer 11: >  The idea was to use the host_path field (empty for image volumes right now) to carry the sub path value. 

It should work but the variable `host_path` would be misleading for developers. I would suggest using a new field instead, i.e. `image_sub_path` or `image_path`. 

And I'm happy to hear more ideas and suggestions from you and others.

Reviewer 11: The image is mounted with read-only mode. If the subpath is provided but it doesn't exist in the image, what will be happened?

Author: I also am a fan of reusing but am also happy to introduce a new field. the key is if subpath isn't used, older cri implemetations should still work IMO. I think if subpath doesn't exist in image the pod creation should fail

Reviewer 2: I'll update the section to cover the sub path details.

- Expand unit and e2e tests
- Add three metrics for an admin to see the success of their image volumes
    - `image_volume_requested_total`
    - `image_volume_mounted_success`

>     - `image_volume_mounted_error`

Reviewer 11: Is it possible to add these metrics to the section `###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?`

>     - `image_volume_mounted_error`

Author: kubelet for built-in consistency

>     - `image_volume_mounted_error`

Reviewer 2: Update to reference the kubelet here.

  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

> kube-apiserver, kubelet and CRI implementation have to support the feature for it to work e2e.

Reviewer 3: I called it out earlier but what is meant by "CRI Implementation supports the feature"?

Will this be feature gated at the container runtime level? Or will it be a enabled for all right when it goes into containerd/CRIO?

How do we handle skew of container runtime against kubelet/kubeapi-server? Containerd will have many production users that may not have this feature enabled so it would be worth thinking through the UX in this case.

Reviewer 2: > I called it out earlier but what is meant by "CRI Implementation supports the feature"?

It basically turns down to if the `Mount` structure uses the `Image` field as indicator (at least for CRI-O):
https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/82e1e9174de30efdb4f82fbb5251c31e4a7ce34a/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L257

> Will this be feature gated at the container runtime level? Or will it be a enabled for all right when it goes into containerd/CRIO?

For CRI-O there will be no feature gate, I can't speak how containerd will handle it.

Reviewer 3: > For CRI-O the volume will just not appear. I assume the only way to resolve this would be an additional runtime config field within the CRI.

Is that a runtime handler?

Reviewer 2: @kannon92 no, I was more thinking about adding it to: https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/82e1e9174de30efdb4f82fbb5251c31e4a7ce34a/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L135-L142

Reviewer 3: This seems to be something that is important for containerd integration but that is not yet in scope for beta off. It is in scope for beta on though.

  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

kube-apiserver, kubelet and CRI implementation have to support the feature for it to work e2e.

> If any of these components downgrades or turns it off, the volume will not be mounted.

Author: Eventually, I can enumerate the case.

  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.
-->

Same as above: all the components must have support for it to work.
Specifically, kube-apiserver will filter this field if it doesn't recognize/support it.
If the kubelet doesn't support the field, it will not pull the image, and the path will not be present for the volume manager

> to mount it in, and the pod will fail.

Reviewer: for oci volumes .. does it apply that the volume manager will mount?.. in this case isn't the container runtime the volume manager..

Reviewer 11: > for oci volumes .. does it apply that the volume manager will mount?

please see https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4897#discussion_r1794485855

if the CRI implementation doesn't support it, then the PullImage request will fail and the pod creation will fail.

If the kubelet does not support the feature because it's too old, then the
container creation will fail because the volume manager is unable to attach or

> mount the volume because no volume plugin is available for the provided source.

Reviewer: volume plugin?

Reviewer 11: The image volume plugin is a no-op plugin. Before introducing the image volume type, the volume plugin did all operations on a volume. To avoid breaking the existing logic, the image volume plugin was introduced to handle the image volume type. However, most of the operations do nothing except for `GetAttributes` and `CanSupport` because the real operations are done by the ContainerRuntime.

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/volume/image/image.go#L30

Reviewer 11: @haircommander In most cases, attach/detach is handled by kcm. Image volume plugin does not support attach/detach.

Reviewer 11: cc @saschagrunert

Reviewer 9: @saschagrunert Can we address this if not resolved?

Reviewer 2: Updated the sentence to not mention "attach". It was mostly a copy/paste from the error message users see when they try the skew scenario and the kubelet is too old.

  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.
-->

Same as above: all the components must have support for it to work.

> Specifically, every component will ignore or filter the field if it doesn't recognize/support it.

Reviewer 6: Please expand on behavior when the kubelet is at a level where this isn't enabled by default.

  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.
-->

Same as above: all the components must have support for it to work.
Specifically, kube-apiserver will filter this field if it doesn't recognize/support it.

> If the kubelet doesn't support the field, it will not pull the image, and the path will not be present for the volume manager

Reviewer: I don't follow the phrase "and the path will not be present for the volume manager" in this context but it makes sense after reading the next paragraph re old kubelet with missing volume plugin, presumably extending the capability to allow oci volume source mounting by the runtime.  Maybe reorder or clarify?

Reviewer 2: Yep, done

  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.
-->

Same as above: all the components must have support for it to work.
Specifically, kube-apiserver will filter this field if it doesn't recognize/support it.
If the kubelet doesn't support the field, it will not pull the image, and the path will not be present for the volume manager
to mount it in, and the pod will fail.

If the kubelet does not support the feature because it's too old, then the
container creation will fail because the volume manager is unable to mount the
volume because no volume plugin is available for the provided source.

> If the CRI implementation doesn't support it, then the PullImage request will

Reviewer 3: Thank you for adding a trouble shooting section.

  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.
-->

Same as above: all the components must have support for it to work.
Specifically, kube-apiserver will filter this field if it doesn't recognize/support it.
If the kubelet doesn't support the field, it will not pull the image, and the path will not be present for the volume manager
to mount it in, and the pod will fail.
if the CRI implementation doesn't support it, then the PullImage request will fail and the pod creation will fail.

> TODO: check what happens when kubelet is too old to support the feature

Reviewer 6: The sig probably needs this information to approve enabling this feature in production clusters in 1.32.

are exercising the `switch` of feature gate itself (what happens if I disable a
feature gate after having objects written with the new field) are also critical.
You can take a look at one potential example of such test in:

> htps://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97058/files#diff-7826f7adbc1996a05ab52e3f5f02429e94b68ce6bce0dc534d1be636154fded3R246-R282

Reviewer 12: `s/htps/https/g`

Author: whoops

will rollout across nodes.
-->

> kube-apiserver must support it, and every node that has a pod scheduled that attempts to mount image volumes must have a kubelet and CRI that support it.

Reviewer 6: as a practical matter, how can this be enforced.

Author: I can only imagine it could be enforced in the mixed support situation (apiserver has support but kubelets don't), in which case an admission webhook or scheduling plugin could be added. If the field is getting filtered before the pod is processed, I'm not sure there's anything an admin could do. do I understand the request correctly?

Reviewer 6: This mixed support situation will happen for an indeterminate period of time on every upgrading cluster. Describing specifically what happens during this period is important.

What is bad behavior they should anticipate?

Reviewer 2: I think this is highly related to the `Version Skew Strategy` above, I added more context to the section to clarify how the kubelet behaves if the feature is not available there.

> If any don't, the volume won't be enabled

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
If any don't, the volume won't be enabled.
```

will rollout across nodes.
-->

kube-apiserver must support it, and every node that has a pod scheduled that
attempts to mount image volumes must have a kubelet and CRI that support it.
If any don't, the volume won't be enabled and containers will not start. If the
kubelet does not support it but will be upgraded, then the container will become
available after the upgrade.

> Since this field only applies on a per node basis, once the control plane agrees

Reviewer 3: We have a possible of component feature gate skew here (ie kube-apiserver has feature gate off and kubelet has feature on). What is the expected behavior for this? And if we flip it (kubelet off and kube-apiserver on)?

Reviewer 2: If the API is not available then the feature cannot be used by the nodes because the fields are not set. 

If the API is available but the kubelet has not enabled it, then the fields will be ignored by the kubelet.

Reviewer 3: That is pretty clear. Maybe update the text to state that.

Reviewer 6: > If the API is available but the kubelet has not enabled it, then the fields will be ignored by the kubelet.

We've been around a couple times, I thought @haircommander told me that old kubelets rejected usernamespace pods.

are missing a bunch of machinery and tooling and can't do that now.
-->

> Not yet but they will be.

Reviewer 10: :raised_eyebrow:

Reviewer 9: Can we flesh out this section with proposed steps for testing?

Reviewer 2: Added a paragraph about the upgrade and rollback testing.

logs or events for this purpose.
-->

There was not any metric added for alpha.

> For beta, a metric can be added to report an image volume was successfully mounted in the kubelet

Reviewer 6: need different labels for total, success, and failure.

- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

TODO(haircommander): what's the best way to check this? If the kubelet ignores the field in the pod spec, then KAS could request a

> pod be created with an image volume and report that intent, but the kubelet could have not actually mounted it.

Reviewer 6: what does an old kubelet do?  I would expect the unknown image type to result in the pod being stuck in a pending phase forever.

Author: it looks like the pod is created without the volume https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/815532749c551413f8b9d9be0ae1f24cb3a1e871/pkg/kubelet/kuberuntime/kuberuntime_manager.go#L1383

Reviewer 6: > it looks like the pod is created without the volume https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/815532749c551413f8b9d9be0ae1f24cb3a1e871/pkg/kubelet/kuberuntime/kuberuntime_manager.go#L1383

Ok, I can probably live with that too, but this section needs to indicate some helpful bash hints for knowing whether the volume was indeed mounted.

Reviewer 11: What is the desired state for the created pod when the feature-gate is disabled on kubelet or the pod is scheduled on a node with older kubelet version?

Is the pod running or failed?

From kubelet's volume manager perspective, it will fail to mount the volume into pod because the image volume plugin is not registered in the kubelet when the feature-gate is disabled or the pod is scheduled on a node with older kubelet version. It leads to the pod failed to start. The pod will be in the Pending state.

- https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/06fb818f86e04770fb25b974d9c716bd519e093d/pkg/kubelet/volumemanager/volume_manager.go#L393
- https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/06fb818f86e04770fb25b974d9c716bd519e093d/pkg/volume/util/util.go#L534
- https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/06fb818f86e04770fb25b974d9c716bd519e093d/pkg/kubelet/volumemanager/populator/desired_state_of_world_populator.go#L305

Author: ah that's even better IMO. I'll update it to reflect that, I misunderstood the code

logs or events for this purpose.
-->

There was not any metric added for alpha.

> For beta, three metrics can be added to report the state of image volume:

Reviewer: sgtm

Recall that end users cannot usually observe component logs or access metrics.
-->

- [x] Events: All events for pulling images (failures and successes) also apply
  to image volumes, because they re-use the same code paths. This makes it
  consistent and straight forward for end users to verify what has been pulled

>   and if a Pod has been started successfully.

Reviewer 10: For beta and beyond, I think it'd be good to help users see which image pulls were for volumes and which were for the code.

Author: I actually updated this section to use the metrics defined in the area above

Recall that end users cannot usually observe component logs or access metrics.
-->

- [x] Events

>   - Event Reason: Pod running event

Reviewer 6: elaborate on the "doesn't work" case here too please.  It will come up for every upgraded cluster during the transition.

Reviewer 2: Updated this section to outline that we re-use the existing events for image pull. This will not change with the graduation.

Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
-->

- [x] Metrics
  - Metric name: `kubelet_image_pull_duration_seconds_bucket`
  - Components exposing the metric: kubelet
- [x] Metrics
  - Metric name: `pod_start_sli_duration_seconds`
  - Components exposing the metric: kubelet
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

Note: there is not currently a well defined SLI[1] for stateful pods, and it's likely this feature will drastically affect that if a big
image needs to be pulled from a registry.

1: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-scalability/slos/pod_startup_latency.md#footnote3

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

<!--
Describe the metrics themselves and the reasons why they weren't added (e.g., cost,
implementation difficulties, etc.).
-->

A metric to show volume type so admins could find when their image volumes were requested

> potentially a success/error metric for showing that volumes did or did not get mounted

Reviewer 6: this looks like a reasonable beta requirement.

Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
-->

- [x] Metrics
  - Metric name: `kubelet_image_pull_duration_seconds_bucket`
  - Components exposing the metric: kubelet
- [x] Metrics
  - Metric name: `pod_start_sli_duration_seconds`
  - Components exposing the metric: kubelet
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

Note: there is not currently a well defined SLI[1] for stateful pods, and it's likely this feature will drastically affect that if a big
image needs to be pulled from a registry.

1: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-scalability/slos/pod_startup_latency.md#footnote3

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

<!--
Describe the metrics themselves and the reasons why they weren't added (e.g., cost,
implementation difficulties, etc.).
-->

A metric to show volume type so admins could find when their image volumes were requested
as well as a success/error metric for showing that volumes did or did not get mounted

> These will be added in beta.

Reviewer 10: At beta, are these missing or not?

Author: They currently don't exist, but will before this moves to beta

Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
-->

- [x] Metrics
  - Metric name: `kubelet_image_pull_duration_seconds_bucket`
  - Components exposing the metric: kubelet
- [x] Metrics
  - Metric name: `pod_start_sli_duration_seconds`
  - Components exposing the metric: kubelet
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

Note: the pod's start SLI may be affected if the image that is being pulled is large. An accurate comparison in pod start time is
if the contents of the image mount are stored in the container's image, rather than present on a different volume type, as the

> cost of pulling from a registry needs to be controlled for.

Reviewer 2: Fixed as suggested.

      - Impact of its degraded performance or high-error rates on the feature:
-->

> A CRI implementation with support, and an available registry that has the requested image

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
A CRI implementation with support, and an available registry that has the requested image.
```

  - Supported number of objects per namespace (for namespace-scoped objects)
-->

> No

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
No.
```

  - Supported number of objects per namespace (for namespace-scoped objects)
-->

> new type of volume: image
> 

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
No
```

  - Estimated amount of new objects: (e.g., new Object X for every existing Pod)
-->

> A new type of volume in the pods, which will have the same size as other volume types

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
A new type of volume in the pods, which will have the same size as other volume types.
```

[existing SLIs/SLOs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#kubernetes-slisslos
-->

> Not technically because stateful pods don't have a defined SLI

Author: I thought any pod that used a volume is stateful

> Not technically because stateful pods don't have a defined SLI

Reviewer 10: Not so. Pods that mount volumes _might_ have local state.

- a readonly `image` volume? Might not be stateful.
- a readonly `secret` volume? Might not be stateful.

> Not technically because stateful pods don't have a defined SLI

Author: updated to drop that caveat and add a different one

> Not technically because stateful pods don't have a defined SLI

Reviewer 9: Let's drop the term stateful pod.

> Not technically because stateful pods don't have a defined SLI

Reviewer 2: Done

[supported limits]: https://git.k8s.io/community//sig-scalability/configs-and-limits/thresholds.md
-->

> CPU/Memory will be used when pulling an image volume, proportional to the size of the image.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CPU/Memory/disk will be used when pulling an image volume, proportional to the size of the image.
```

[supported limits]: https://git.k8s.io/community//sig-scalability/configs-and-limits/thresholds.md
-->

> CPU/Memory/Disk will be used when pulling an image volume, proportional to the size of the image.

Reviewer 9: An image could be pulled using a constant sized memory buffer.

Reviewer 2: Added that note.

and validate the declared limits?
-->

> Yes, in the same way a large image used to run a container could use these resources (so no additional risk)

Reviewer 3: Given that a huge interest in this is to help pull AI models, I do think that this would cause increased inodes/disk.

The additional risk (IMO) would be that in addition to images, we could potentially have really large images pulled into a volume.

Author: yeah my point is that this actually reduces that risk. the alternative (distribute a model through oci) would be to pack it into the container image, and that's prone to not be shared on the node. There's no limit to the size of an image, so this risk is present already and is only improved with this feature

Reviewer 3: I see.

and validate the declared limits?
-->

> Yes, in the same way a large image used to run a container could use these resources (so no additional risk)

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Yes, in the same way a large image used to run a container could use these resources (so no additional risk).
```

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

> Pods won't be able to be created, so the feature won't be accessible

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Pods won't be able to be created, so the feature won't be accessible.
```

- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

- 16-05-2024 Issue opened 
- 21-06-2024 KEP merged, targeted at alpha

> - 2-10-2024 KEP updated to first beta draft

Reviewer 9: We drop the beta line?

Reviewer 2: Done
